critical and creative thinking
2.0
this episode is something of a hobby
horse of mine and the reason it is is
because i have worked in education and i
have worked in what's called curriculum
development
one issue as every teacher knows
is that every politician parent
scientist and in modern parlance
stakeholder has an opinion about what
should be in a school curriculum what
should be taught health advocates say
nutrition and exercise science
scientists say more science and
scientific thinking
programmers say more coding
conservatives say more civics socialists
say more gender race and sexuality
studies
everyone debates the content of history
whether and to what extent religion is
taught
half of the mathematicians will say more
algebra the other half will say more
calculus and the other half will say
more statistics
yes i was joking there
anyway all the coercion aside
the indoctrination aside and in places
like australia the compulsory nature of
everything in the schooling system aside
given this whole unholy system is not
going anywhere anytime soon no matter
what many of us say about it it's worth
looking at what could have worked or
more optimistically what could work to
the extent it can work even in places
where everything is compulsory or
coerced after all if school students are
getting more calculus when they should
be getting statistics or if they are
getting a terribly anti-western view
from history and a science curriculum
polluted by politics and activism and
pessimism about tomorrow perhaps there
is something like so-called intellectual
self-defense to be found in more basic
skills
something like critical and creative
thinking skills well it's actually all
the rage right now in education let me
tell you it's very fashionable but then
so is almost all the content of the
curriculum in schools and universities
it runs on trends and fashions rather
too often and in too many departments
most jurisdictions across australia the
usa those in the british tradition in
global institutions like the
international baccalaureate office and
of course in the universities now talk
about how they teach critical thinking
and creative thinking i've actually made
videos about this before years ago
i've written about this before multiple
times and years ago
but years have passed and a lot has
happened over even just the last six
years
so i've refined my views somewhat though
not entirely change the way i phrase
things
the underlying ideas are exactly the
same but i need to re-emphasize some
things that i thought perhaps went
without saying they don't
i want to look at critically
what some institutions describe critical
thinking as and therefore why i think
they're wrong i'm going to do that
towards the end but this will take me
telling you
about what i think critical thinking
truly is
compared to the way it's traditionally
taught
not so much what should be taught in
schools i think that's entirely the
wrong question after all it should be
about what someone wants to learn
but if you want to learn what critical
thinking and what creative thinking is
i have some ideas for you and also and i
know podcasters and lecturers and so on
use this phrase a lot and it rarely ever
rings true the phrase is people often
ask me
i've never had the occasion to use it
before but here this really is if not a
question people often ask me it is the
one i think i have been asked over the
years most frequently that question is
with regards especially to epistemology
what practical use is any of this
exactly and so i want to speak about
that directly
critical and creative thinking amount to
educational buzzwords these days
i have written before about educational
buzzwords and there is a real liability
with their use
if you want to read about my aversion to
such buzzwords look up my article on
learning that's www.bretthull.org
forward slash learning
a problem with a buzzword of any kind is
that a theorist especially in this case
an educational theorist enamored with
neologisms can tend to co-opt already
well-defined concepts redefine them and
subject them to a certain species of
what is called lock-in
lock-in is not an illegism by the way
lock-in is where unintentionally a
designed feature has some negative
effect upon future potentials for growth
the polymath philosopher scientist and
technologist juron leniere uses the
example of the london underground train
system which lacks air conditioning
built at a time when air conditioning
was not possible on trains now that it
is
the tubes are simply not large enough
for the exhaust required to accommodate
air conditioning systems on some of the
trains and so for now at least
passengers are locked in to a hot and
uncomfortable system for months of the
year now geron linear uses this as an
analogy to the way in which social media
platforms sometimes have locked in
features but what does any of this have
to do with anything about education
well as it can happen out there in the
built environment or in the online
environment in train systems in social
media systems so it can happen in
institutions as well so for example in
education sometimes we can define into
being
some terminology that defines future
directions in teaching and this
constrains options for what might be
learned and how
for example does calling certain
activities undertaken in the classroom
critical and creative thinking
lock in how we might clearly think about
these ideas
i am now persuaded
schools and universities have been
headed down the wrong track on this for
a while and so for anyone still working
in those areas or perhaps especially the
students in those places
subject to these fads should want to
pull the brakes metaphorically speaking
and consider whether or not we might
want to widen the tunnel to accommodate
some better ideas about what these terms
mean
critical and creative thinking is the
way knowledge is actually generated as
many who listen to this podcast
regularly will know
how knowledge is generated is the domain
of a particular area of philosophy
called epistemology epistemology is one
of the most interesting important and
practical areas of philosophy and
simultaneously one of the least well
understood subjects we might dare say
anywhere because it's just not taught
almost anywhere
people who know little about philosophy
and have little interest in it can be
dismissive of the entire project because
they think it philosophy is largely
concerned with existential naval gazing
and it's all about endless debates in
moral philosophy or ethics or
metaphysics and ontology which is
concerns about what really truly exists
or what ultimately there is to know or
what the true meaning or definition of a
particular word is and so ultimately the
whole project of doing philosophy
collapses into nothing more than a clash
of mere matters of opinion but
this is all false and in fact it's a
really significant misconception because
epistemology especially
underlies how you think about everything
else
it is the preeminent case of thinking
about thinking
and if your thinking is going wrong then
not only is your understanding of
science possibly going wrong and
morality possibly going wrong and
history possibly going wrong but your
very own personal psychology might be
possibly going wrong
my own interests in philosophy have not
generally been about ethics or
metaphysics so often as about
how can we come to have a deep knowledge
of the world
and this is what epistemology is it's
literally the theory of knowledge as it
is to find anyway an analytical
philosophy and in this area of
philosophy there really is a best theory
that we should strive to understand
not all of what is called philosophy is
interesting by the way i agree on that
much and we'll admit much more later on
but much is worth preserving and trying
to learn more about not least of which
is epistemology as it's relevant to
learning the subject of this podcast and
epistemology as it is currently best
understood and how it applies to having
an optimistic view of humanity and life
and of course the philosophy of science
is absolutely crucial if you want to
understand how scientific knowledge in
particular grows
but i begin to digress returning to our
definition of epistemology as the theory
of knowledge we can rephrase it without
any loss of meaning whatever to
epistemology is the explanation of the
growth of knowledge and this growth of
knowledge can happen as a civilization
or a smaller community or a corporation
or it can happen inside a single mind of
a learner the processes it turns out are
the same
let me explain
there are two absolutely crucial aspects
to the growth of knowledge
creativity and criticism in educational
circles the terms critical and creative
thinking have migrated away from how
they
have been largely and more precisely
been used in perhaps the more rarefied
spheres where they have been genuine
domains of study controversy and
progress over decades
the terms are now synonymous not with
thinking as such but rather with certain
teaching strategies that are more or
less fashionable among some educators
and educational theorists
now i should add that there is a world
of difference between a teaching
strategy and a learning strategy as
anyone involved in education should know
but in practice never seems to take
seriously it is safe to say that almost
all strategies used by teachers to teach
students are the former teaching
strategies not the latter actual
learning strategies teaching strategies
which are typically ways of usually
coercively
organizing school work or ideas on paper
ways of having students respond to
questions or complete tasks whether they
move around a class
speak or not speak draw pictures or
write words indeed the very behaviors
typically promoted by theorists and
cultivated in classes by teachers
these are teaching strategies
these are things that the teacher wants
the student to do
or usually not just wants but instructs
the students to do they are activities
busy work designed to and here's another
buzzword keep the student engaged
engaged means on task on task means
obedient compliant
it does not mean asking off topic
questions and so on almost everything
ever covered in any professional
development course or a university level
teacher training course completed by
teachers and ostensibly labeled a
learning strategy is a teaching strategy
learning strategies are i will come to
later very difficult to come by
and that is because learning happens
best in a free environment where
coercion just is not part of the picture
so it happens to be the case
that one can deploy every teaching
strategy in the countless teaching
handbooks and websites and seminars ever
deployed and learning can still be
elusive why
because simply naming something say nine
hats for better thinking does not mean
it is genuinely about thinking
labeling something does not make it so
thinking is always a creative process
constrained by careful criticism but as
i say
educational theorists love neologisms
educational theorists think that if they
come up with a neologism they have
actually invented a new idea they're not
alone in this prominent so-called public
intellectuals excel at this kind of
thing inventing words typically what
they or the educational theorists have
done is either just label common sense
or some older idea or adapted some
pre-existing set of ideas for the
purpose of naming it a teaching or
learning strategy
and the theorist will always give these
a name in the case of education one
might for example want to encourage
students to become a physics brain
b-r-a-i-n
an idea i came up with when i thought it
was the right thing to do here's how it
works think of something about a topic
that b
bugs you
then also something that you can r
reflect on
and a another idea related to the one
under study find something i interesting
and finally something n negative you can
make up your own acronym
on my own ah reflection about all this i
realized this is a scheme far from
organizing thoughts
it restricted them
some people working in business or
especially the corporate world might be
very familiar with this sort of thing
these buzzword-y acronyms they're all
the rage maybe some are useful maybe not
but whether in the corporate setting or
educational setting indeed anywhere one
is working scientific research music
composition writing painting personal
relationships or detective work what we
really need is straightforward criticism
and creativity
criticize
what don't you understand what is wrong
get to the heart of it
what are you uncomfortable about that's
a criticism what feels wrong
looks wrong clearly is wrong or out of
place what is ugly or unkind what is
false where's the lie where's the
deficiency once you have done this and
succeeded you have identified a problem
you have an error somewhere before you
you can correct it now problems are
soluble you now have the potential to
find the solution and all of this adds
up to the potential for progress
you have criticized but now what well
now you have to create
create
can you improve on this
and this we will find is the harder part
the actually much harder part
but whether it's the criticism part or
the creator part we need maximum space
and freedom to explore options and for
this reason in education at least i have
tended to avoid ways of organizing
thoughts
our minds human minds just don't operate
that way and nor should they
there are exceptions to this wanting to
pass exams for example and yes if that
is your goal those many mnemonics tricks
and techniques can seem to work for some
but we must be careful here
we have to separate out the fact that
passing exams is not the same as
critical and creative thinking passing
exams is about adhering as closely as
possible to someone else's ideas of what
is the correct way to think it is
anti-critical it is not good objecting
to questions in exams taking issue with
the premise of a question sure take a
risk why not
most will not why would they certainly
examinations and assessment tasks in
education generally are antithetical to
anything but adhering to or rising to
meet defined outcomes things already
thought through
it is thus not only anti-critical it is
anti-creativity
it is not about new ideas it is about
showing that you have grasped old ideas
taught ideas
see the problem
and i must say that what i'm not saying
here
is that the best way to be creative is
just to be maximally free at all times
with absolutely no rules in place that's
not the case either
that is why criticism exists it imposes
bounds whether from reality which is a
severe restriction or your own personal
values which should be quite restrictive
on what it is right to create
you cannot just create a scientific
theory that disagrees with multiple
independent tests while contradicting
what we already know
and you are not free to create good
music that more resembles noise when
tolkien wrote lord of the rings he found
that he himself was not free to just
have his characters do
whatever his imagination thought the
world he invented had to be internally
consistent his characters had a history
sometimes already existing in prequels
and he had a rich language and geography
that they all had to conform to
this by the way is why fans of some
blockbuster movies regard some sequels
or prequels as objectively worse than
the so-called canon
canon means the pre-existing background
knowledge of the fiction so if the new
writers or directors come along and
ignore the canon they have violated the
internal consistency the internal logic
of the fictional reality
some fiction therefore is objectively
worse than other fiction precisely
because contradictions are always wrong
unless you think logic should not be
adhered to in which case there is
literally nothing more left to say enjoy
your contradictions and your literal
absurdity but again i digress
let us now return to the basics let us
consider what is meant by critical and
creative thinking
and see if these can help us learn this
is the practical thing
first yes
critical and creative thinking true
critical and creative thinking are the
very means by which we learn indeed they
are the only known means they are the
whole story so far as we can tell
but do we understand that whole story no
far from it it would seem so do we
understand anything yes of course quite
a bit we have some very good some very
true ideas and indeed i can put a number
on it in a sense anyway we understand
something less than around half of that
story we understand a lot about critical
thinking we just understand very little
about creative thinking
so let's begin with what we know
what we know about critical thinking
here i want to cover some of the
important particulars of critical
thinking keep in mind the word
critical
it is no accident this word is related
to the word criticism for that is the
very technique required in critical
thinking one must criticize
what does this mean
criticize means what it does to almost
all people all of the time with one
caveat
it does not or should not
carry the emotional liabilities and
baggage people tend to associate with it
criticism is a wonderful thing when
applied to ideas
it is the means by which ideas are
improved criticism is about pointing out
what is or what may be wrong with an
idea it is about highlighting pointing
out making obvious the weaknesses flaws
and false assumptions of an idea
criticism is a broad topic
in science criticism might most
obviously consist of an experimental
refutation if the experimental results
disagree with the hypothesis
one of three things must hold
the hypothesis is false or the
experiment was flawed or both
whatever the case something that a
scientist is thinking about what just
happened there what is going on is false
but this is why we are or at least
should be very careful in science as
careful as we can be
truly carefully controlled
well-performed accurate and precise
experiments can be called crucial
experiments and can decide between
scientific theories this is a topic of
my previous two podcasts in a situation
where two theories make incompatible
predictions about the outcome of an
experiment we have a problem
which one is correct if all else being
equal they have he the two make the same
predictions about the world well we may
be in the fortunate position to design
and then perform this crucial experiment
this crown jewel of the scientific
enterprise
so the experiment is performed and just
one of the theories disagrees with the
results so we say it is tentatively as
always shown to be false thus it has
been successfully criticized and
progress is made
this successful criticism amounts to a
mortal wounding of the theory
this method of criticism has a simple
aim to show as false an idea i've
written previously about the specifics
of how this can work in physics for
example and for that look up my article
titled general relativity and the role
of evidence this idea of experimental
refutation also called falsification is
essential in science it's not just a
convenient add-on be critical of what
you hear from some actual scientists
always physicists on this topic they are
making an error about what science is
but experimental testing although
essential is not the whole story it is
indispensable but this is only to say it
is necessary but not sufficient
far from sufficient indeed many theories
never actually need to be tested by an
experiment to be refuted scientifically
my listeners will be well aware of david
deutch's brilliant examples in his book
the fabric of reality where he asks us
to consider the theory that eating a
kilogram of grass is the cure for the
common cold that is a testable theory
but do we need to do the experiment to
refute it
no
and the reason is because we can be
critical in another way another mode of
criticism if you like
less about the scientific methodology of
the situation and more about the
epistemological fundamentals of what is
being claimed with the grass eating
theory or rather grass eating prediction
after all that so-called theory or
hypothesis is nothing but a claim of the
sort if you eat the grass then your cold
will be cured it is a prediction but
contains no explanation
now this idea that some claim is
predictive but not explanatory is both
eminently scientific and wonderfully
philosophical we can use both words here
deliberately to illustrate that at the
boundary the techniques in science and
philosophy really do bridge this
permeable wall that separates our
rational investigations into the world
explanations run the entire gamut of our
knowledge of the world but strictly
predictions are the domain of science
properly construed anyway and even then
good scientific predictions are always
subject to what else we might learn in
the future that could change what we
said was going to happen for example a
prediction that the world will warm by 3
degrees celsius in the next 200 years is
not an accurate prediction at all if it
does not come true and it might not come
true if people do things to alter the
course of events such that it never
comes to pass that the warming does
happen for example by sucking carbon
dioxide out of the atmosphere using some
method yet to be invented or invented in
the next 50 years whatever the case if
someone comes to you with a claim that
eating grass for example will cure your
cold does it need testing no
because it's explanationless in my
discussion with naval ravicant on the
naval podcast look for that it's called
the beginning of infinity podcast we
spoke about actually doing this
experiment as david deutsch does in the
fabric of reality if you do the
experiment we would need to specify the
quantity of grass and if we specified it
was exactly one kilogram of grass and
then we find that eating precisely that
amount does not cure the cold this would
not show that 1.1 kilograms of grass
would not cure the cold or that 0.9
kilograms or any of an infinite number
of variations although the hypothesis is
falsifiable it is also infinitely
variable and the experiment cannot
possibly refute all variations of it we
can imagine some medical crank saying
well maybe it's 1.01 kilograms or 1.001
kilograms and so on experiment
really is not the appropriate critical
tool here even though it is one of the
critical tools in our critical arsenal
so what else do we have
the appropriate critical tool here is
the explanation criteria what is the
explanation criteria
it is the simple distinction between
whether or not a claim comes with an
explanation or not it's that simple most
especially if the claim is scientific
but not necessarily
in sports there are often reasons a
skilled practitioner does a certain
thing but a fully formed good
explanation might be elusive this gets
into the weeds a bit but basically there
are lots of places where the knowledge
is inexplicit we'll ignore that wrinkle
for now let's stick to science where we
can generalize to many other areas but
you can imagine if you watch the
olympics and you see a gymnast doing a
fantastically complicated routine no
amount of their explicit instruction of
what's going on and why would ever help
you understand exactly how to do it
you'd have to get out there on the mat
and do it yourself you'd have to learn
the inexplicit stuff by having a go
yourself anyway
back to science
so let's apply this explanation criteria
to grass cures the cold
what is the explanation of how grass
cures the cold
um
what explanation
exactly right
do we even have an explanation of how
grass might cure the cold no if we did
we would be able to criticize that for
example by using an experiment but
absent an explanation that is the
criticism
no explanation
that's a flaw that's a problem indeed in
science that's an error for someone who
comes along and says grass cures the
common cold or indeed comes along and
makes any claim ask how if there is no
reasonable satisfactory good call it
what you like if there is no explanation
it can be rejected as david has observed
any crank on the street corner with a
sandwich board this doesn't happen so
often these days but it used to that the
world will end next tuesday well they
have a predictive theory and it's
testable and it's going to be tested and
shown false
just because something is falsifiable
just because something's testable
doesn't make it a good explanation grass
cue is the common cold not a good
explanation without an accompanying
mechanism of action
we can reject it without ever doing any
kind of experiment let alone on
ourselves
this is true of almost all claims made
in science and elsewhere
we don't even bother with the experiment
what if it did work
then we would seek to find out why and
until we had a criticism of the theory
eating grass cures colds then that would
be our best theory bad as it is and it
would be possible to improve for example
we might find particular amounts work
better than others and chemists might
isolate the actual active ingredient a
story much like this explains the action
of aspirin apparently that the ancients
would chew on the bark of a willow tree
and that would relieve their headaches
and eventually that led to pills of
aspirin as a really effective headache
treatment in medicine once upon a time
it was the case that some treatment was
found to work but it was not known why
and by work we mean better than no
intervention at all but these days even
in medicine
that is a very rare exception to the
general rule there are entire fields of
science from pharmacology to physiology
neurology and all kinds of carefully
practiced and error-corrected surgical
interventions and even where some
medicine is used off label as we say
there is often a good explanation known
by at least some members of the medical
community even if it is not being
published one reason for this is that as
it turns out doctors are very busy
people and getting around to going
through the relatively recent phenomenon
that is the peer review process
is rather more difficult than word of
mouth or these days a more informal
review process peer review
of double-blind placebo-controlled
trials is indeed a supposed gold
standard of a kind but it is also the
most lengthy and difficult way of
showing the efficacy of what might
already be known to be a good
explanation of efficacy to be known in
this sense has multiple meanings
someone might already know of a
treatment and a good explanation for it
before the rest of the scientific
community does
take for example the famous case of and
let me plug australia here the
australian doctor barry marshall
who had an idea that stomach ulcers were
caused by a bacteria and therefore could
be cured by antibiotics
until barry marshall
many people thought stomach ulcers
indeed today many people still think
they are
caused by stress anxiety or something
like that
anyway so the story goes true story
barry marshall swallowed a nasty mix of
ulcer causing bacteria
a good aussie risk taker the crocodile
hunter of medicine so to speak anyways
yes he got stomach ulcers now at that
point in pain and no doubt writhing in
agony in bed waiting for the penicillin
or what not to kick in and cure him he
knew and his colleagues knew they really
knew the good explanation but it was not
yet double-blind placebo-controlled and
reported in peer-reviewed journals so
the wider community did not know but he
knew
and he would have been remiss had he
seen a patient the following week and
not used antibiotics off label for
anyone who came to see him and who he
diagnosed as having stomach ulcers all
he could say was i know this works i did
it to myself stomach ulcers are caused
by bacteria and i know how and why
regardless of what the literature does
or does not say at the moment and by the
way he got the nobel prize in medicine
for that physiology whatever it's called
so much is true of any scientific
discovery yet to be published or
peer-reviewed of course
errors can be made and corrected but
here is the point until such time as an
error is found that is the best
explanation going an astrophysicist who
detects a wobble in a star 200 light
years away over the course of their
three-year phd and does the appropriate
calculations and has them checked by a
colleague knows long before the
publication of their thesis much less
the publication in a journal somewhere
much less before any other scientist
even bothers if they ever do to check
the results that they have found a
planet that is the other thing about
some scientific journals some are barely
ever read and if they are only a small
portion of those are ever checked
carefully which is to say the
experimental results where they exist
are checked at least in a timely fashion
so some individuals or small groups of
people can indeed have good explanations
when others do not the criticism has
happened not in the way we are supposed
to believe it can only happen in science
namely peer review but rather validly
and reliably in the mind of a single
person or a small group of people and
criticism in science is indeed the way
we make progress it is the means by
which we reject false theories and bad
explanations and no explanations this
criticism this critical attitude is
cashed out through experiments but not
only experiments as i've emphasized
already it can be knocked down full stop
over and out refutation without an
experiment and this is true in all
subjects in all spheres of knowledge
always
so how does it work elsewhere so let me
call the next section of this podcast
critical thinking everywhere we've said
critical thinking works in science
through a number of channels the most
obvious of which is the experiment
if something disagrees with your
experiment then typically but not always
mind you it means the idea being tested
is false but we can never rule out the
fact that there are rare cases where it
can also mean there is a flaw with the
experiment as i said earlier
but this split in frequency more often a
theory is wrong when the experimental
results disagree with it then the
experimental results are wrong in some
way and the theory is right can tell you
nothing whatever about which situation
you are in when you encounter this
problem anyways as we said experiments
are not the whole story we must ask
what is the accompanying explanation if
there is none we have explanationless
science in other words we have the
facade of science the thin veneer and
imposter the shape of science only
science is ultimately about explanations
of the physical world not experiments
both however are necessary
but what about in mathematics
well there experiments are typically not
needed
although there are kind of exceptions to
this especially in applied mathematics
or something like the four color theorem
which says you you only need four colors
on a map to color it so that no two
adjacent regions have the same color
which is kind of surprising if you've
never thought about it before anyways in
a sense this did require a sort of
experiment it was proved using a
computer to check the possibilities in
abstract space that were just too
numerous for a human to do
whatever the case in mathematics we less
often speak of experiments as we do of
proofs which then serve as refutations
or criticisms a proof of a theorem is a
criticism of its negation or in
mathematics we might perform on a
completely abstract inequality of some
kind a substitution where the result
disagrees with a prediction of the
theorem a special case of reductio ad
absurdum or if we know some result holds
like say pythagoras theorem and we
actually substitute in numbers and it
turns out the equality does not hold
we've found an error identifying an
error is a kind of criticism and that
allows progress too identifying and
correcting errors in this way if we have
a general case we know is our best
explanation like the pythagoras example
and a purported special case fails we
have a problem
maybe we've disproved pythagoras theorem
more likely we've made an error in our
substitution and subsequent calculations
or both
basically criticisms in mathematics
amount to computations i workings and
calculations that show some theorem or
some guess is wrong i'll say that again
is about showing something is wrong
and that is the role of criticism i feel
like i've got to label the point
criticism is about showing that and how
something is wrong and the criticism
itself is accompanied by some
explanation as well a reason why that
something is wrong
in history just as in science to some
extent a new idea is put forth in the
case of history it's a new idea about
the past
we criticize it which amounts to
something like evaluating it against
other known sources other kinds of
evidence we're comparing our theories of
the evidence to our new theory of what
might have happened in the past
it is a clash as in science between
theories evidence and explanation in
music
that a combination of sounds is less
pleasing than another is a criticism the
waste paper basket of the composer is
filled with criticisms which may indeed
be inexplicit but they're real but how
to come up with good criticisms
here we find a crossover and it is no
accident we are humans not machines we
think we do not simply follow an
automatic algorithm like a computer
how to come up with good criticisms
well we must create them
so criticism is a creative act
creativity is needed and in some sense
this then means that the critical
thinking versus creative thinking
distinction is in a sense false
there's no
deep dichotomy here it's all creativity
of a kind
but while that is true distinctions are
useful there is a species of creative
thought that we designate as being
critical as i've alluded to this
critical thinking part is the stuff we
have a lot of knowledge about as such
there are useful heuristics rules about
how to go about methodically in order to
check your guesses to identify errors
and possibly correct them to find the
problems and the thing about criticisms
is we can always invent new ways of
criticizing but there is a useful
distinction here between creativity that
is pure imagination
and the criticism that restricts it and
when these two things work together to
create something new we have innovation
but aside from what we have said so far
about kinds of criticism those being
experiment the presence or lack of good
explanations the possibility of a proof
or disproof what else do we have well we
may just have so-called rules of thumb
things that seem to work rules that
generally are applied in some subject
area or other in order to check if your
new creation conforms to the standards
expected in that area here i'm thinking
more about artistic or engineering
endeavors but of course sometimes new
kinds of criticism are needed a new way
of performing experiments say or the
invention of new equipment and so forth
criticism showing how something is wrong
can take quite the act of creativity as
we've already alluded to but let us keep
in view for the moment that critical
thinking is at heart about showing how
something is wrong
to what end though
well to improve things it could be to
improve ourselves quite literally
improve our own thinking improve our
learning to get something right that we
got wrong to create a better product
whatever that might be
this is the purpose
and so what a wonderful purpose
criticism serves improvement and
progress
why it has such a bad name i'm not
entirely sure but i guess it has
something to do with two mistakes
one is the distinction made between
so-called constructive and destructive
criticism the thing is
all criticism aims at destruction for
the purpose of construction or at least
this is the ideal case criticism aims to
destroy a less good idea to replace it
with a newly constructed better truer
idea
of course what people mean typically by
constructive versus destructive
criticism is more about tone
constructive criticism is about being
nice to someone that you're talking to
and destructive is about being mean and
so there is the concern related to this
that criticism might be applied to
people and here i completely understand
the concern one should always be careful
to focus on the ideas not the person
we are criticizing ideas not people as i
like to say
people
have ideas but they are not identical to
ideas this is important
of course some people are emotionally
wedded and deeply to some ideas
if we value those people and their
feelings then yes we must ask them if
they care for us to continue to
criticize their own ideas if such
criticism is painful to them but these
ideas are in the broader scheme details
and not walls before us when discussing
progress in science or mathematics or
philosophy or whatever else is of
academic value to us in the creation of
knowledge we must as far as we possibly
can
keep our emotions in check and not let
ourselves be hurt when critical thinking
is applied to our own ideas those who do
not wish to participate in the growth of
knowledge should never be forced we need
not include them in this the ethics of
critical thinking is thus reasonably
straightforward it is about applying the
method to ideas and not to people and
that method attempting to show the ideas
is wrong for the purpose of making
improvements is not well known
if i can offer some practical advice
here in discussions especially in person
using the spoken word people tend to do
this as a matter of course in the
english speaking world it's more natural
but not in the written word or not in
the online world
the error is this the use of the second
person
namely the word you or any synonym as
soon as a sentence contains the word you
y o u you
things have become personalized and if
it's a criticism then it's become
accusatory
it's an easy shift to make in one's
language especially online and in the
written word you do this naturally as i
say if you're just talking to someone
it's very rare to say you and if you do
say you to the person right in front of
you then it comes off as impolite well
the same as the way that it's read
online as i say it's an easy shift to
make my own tactic is online to either
drop the word altogether or to use the
word one
o n e one especially in place of
wherever i might otherwise use the word
y-o-u-u whatever the case
personalizing a discussion especially
about abstract academic topics is a
criticism so saying you are
personalizing things by talking about
yourself or myself doesn't work as well
as simply ignoring whatever the claim
about yourself or myself was and
proceeding by focusing on the content
but this topic of how to have
discussions is itself a whole other
subject and i've rarely found people are
much interested in having it one reason
is almost everyone thinks they are very
good at discussion of course they are
they've been talking since they were
toddlers why wouldn't they be expert at
it by now well one reason is that we are
all of us inheritors of a particular
culture and some cultures more than
others can have an accusatory way of
speaking which almost immediately
degenerates into talking about people
rather than ideas
it's very hard to bring such discussions
back on the rails once they are off the
rails the criticisms then become focused
on people's personalities or on the tone
being used or any of a number of other
personal attributes and completely away
from the idea under discussion critical
thinking is about criticizing ideas not
people it can criticize the ideas people
have but that should not hurt people
again there are exceptions some people
are religiously wedded to some ideas to
even suggest that the almighty spaghetti
monster might not be an actual
omnipotent being could be cause to hurt
some people but the reasons
for that feeling of hurt can themselves
be criticized without criticizing the
person or even the imaginary god it's a
deep area and this is merely a sketch of
critical thinking the substance of all
this is of course not an idea that has
originated with me or entirely with any
one person and yet we can name one
person above all others who has defined
the field
karl popper perhaps more than any other
person this philosopher set out the
scheme over a number of years in a
variety of books on the topic his books
were never called critical thinking and
perhaps that is why they are not as well
known in educational circles as they
should be in fact he never explicitly
talked much at all about learning even
though
the content is explicitly about
knowledge creation instead he wrote
books titled the logic of scientific
discovery and
conjectures and refutations and
objective knowledge and he has come to
be known as a philosopher of science and
politics and of course his contributions
in those areas were as fundamentally
groundbreaking and objectively
progressive as einsteins were in physics
or mozart's were in music but for
education as i say he explained how
knowledge is created that is how
learning can take place and importantly
for my purposes here what the critical
method actually is his philosophy has
come to be known as critical rationalism
and that is the philosophy of critical
thinking if he wrote conjectures and
refutations today he could quite easily
retitle it without any loss of meaning
to
creativity and criticism something like
that be a bit more fashionable but it is
to me astonishing that papa's critical
rationalism does not now inform how
cultures communities families parents
and dare we say schools and universities
help to improve learning children are of
course natural learners they are
learning machines they go out into the
world and without any hangups or
extremely few
without any fear or with very little
guess and check they experiment the only
reason they or any of us slow down is
because we like they eventually learn
ideas from authorities about what to be
fearful of what is the wrong thing to do
why to be scared and who should be
listened to and therefore why something
should not be tried out and tested over
years and then decades the ballasts of
all that bad anti-rational anti-critical
ideas are learned taken on board and
then finally frame what a person feels
they are permitted to think about and
therefore learn
so some kind of explicit thinking about
critical thinking
can help later on to undo perhaps some
of this
papa got there popper identified how
knowledge is created and therefore how
learning must operate
but it is all written in a sort of ideal
sense it is in the sense of if you do
not have what are called these hang-ups
things you do not like thinking about or
doing
these are caused by what david deutsch
terms anti-rational memes
ideas that hold themselves immune from
criticism identifying and correcting
those well that is very hard and we
would need yet another podcast all about
that as new as critical rationalism is
on the scene so new it barely gets any
mention in any form whatever in the
formal educational institutions despite
being the theory of learning as i say
the concept of anti-rational memes is
newer still
but let's stick to the basics for the
moment
how can we teach people who want to know
about this critical thinking stuff more
about it especially young people
well firstly
don't
don't teach them as in don't force
instruction on them unless they ask
that's part of the anti-critical problem
a person needs to have a problem in the
first place their problem someone has to
ask you first for help but when they do
ask about something then the
conversation can begin about how we can
come to know this thing that thing or
anything else
and what i'm about to say
comes with an important caveat i'll
return to at the end there is actually
no formula to being a good critical
thinker there is no fixed set of rules
or even as i will say heuristics there
are some useful hints but learning these
by rote would be anti-critical any
university can provide you with a list
of critical thinking techniques i think
they're mostly largely misguided again
i'll come back to that but what i want
to do here is concentrate on criticism
broadly speaking what are the modes of
criticism that can be employed to
actually help someone be a critical
thinker rather than just achieve better
marks or fulfill the requirements of
some task undertaken at school or
university which asks them to engage
critically or use their critical
thinking skills depending on the level
that someone is at let's consider a
teenager i find a two-step process
useful in guiding the capacity to think
critically about any topic whether it is
something in the media or something in a
book or something you are trying to
learn
here's my two steps step one
assume that what you are being presented
with is false
step two
find out why
so those are my two steps this is not to
say that you will find out why it's
false that's just an assumption after
all in reality many times what you are
learning is the best present
understanding of a thing but the very
act of trying to uncover what is false
about an idea
reveals what is most true about an idea
or nearer to true about an idea if some
claim fails to be refuted by your
attempts to find out why it's false in
other words if an idea survives your
criticisms you've learned a lot now
trying to find out why some idea is
possibly false entails quite a vast
amount of creativity it requires one to
create criticisms
you have to create them in your own mind
but
happily there are well trodden paths
worn by great thinkers who have gone
before
philosophy the best sort
is a toolbox of criticisms so is your
own background knowledge and of course
there is the corpus of knowledge out
there you can check any claim you like
against what else is known and all of it
in light of the deepest principles we
have things that i have mentioned before
like whether there is a good explanation
lurking behind it all but if i were
helping someone improve that general
skill or set of heuristics we call
critical thinking i would ask them to
begin by considering if the idea under
review meshes well with all other
important ideas is it strictly
contradicted by anything you do know if
we cannot think of something for example
if a news story says that a video has
emerged from the forest of canada
purporting to show a non-human ape loose
on a continent without apes
is the explanation that it is actually
an ape or that an error has been made
are we contradicting what we know about
apes loose in canadian forests did it
come from a zoo or did it evolve there
whatever the case if we cannot find such
a contradiction or obvious contradiction
consider does a law of epistemology
contradict it so if it is a scientific
claim is it testable but we can also
consider does a known law of science
contradict it does it demand an infinite
supply of instant energy does whatever
you're being presented with assume the
laws of thermodynamics are false for
some other claims especially in the
political or economic realm we can ask
of it is it immoral on balance would it
force free and peaceful people to do
other than they would want to would it
coerce them on average would it lower
the well-being of all conscious
creatures does it entail theft
and here are some other useful guides to
being a good critical thinker in the
critical rationalist tradition anyway
does the idea rely solely or to a large
extent or to any extent upon an appeal
to authority
are we asked to believe it because some
politician priest scientist book or
doctor just says it's true
do you understand the idea that itself
is a criticism that does not mean it is
false but if you do not understand it
and you have tried hard this is a
criticism of the idea in terms of its
expression
it may not have been properly explained
to you or it may not be sufficiently
clearly expressed to you which is
related to is the idea being expressed
in simple language this is related to an
even deeper criticism perhaps the
deepest of all
i would call it deutsche's anti-rational
principle the question here is
does this idea hold itself immune from
criticism
i'll say it again
does this idea that you're considering
hold itself immune from criticism in any
way
that is fundamental that entails almost
everything else once we have exhausted
everything else and have thought of it
entails is it clearly expressed does it
stick its neck out in its predictions
about the physical world does it claim
to know things that cannot possibly be
known like the state of the planet next
year or in 100 years
is it a claim so general as to be
vacuous and thus hold itself immune from
criticism for example there should be no
pollution
or the children are our future or
do what is right so these are some of
the ways criticism works there are many
many more one can consider the long and
interesting list of so-called logical
fallacies that can be found in many
places on the internet just consider as
many ways as possible that the idea is
lacking or false
if it survives all of your attempts to
criticize it then it just might contain
something worth knowing it could still
be false of course we expect even our
most cherished explanations to turn out
false in the final analysis things can
always unexpectedly turn out false you
just might not be imaginative that is
creative enough to find out what its
floor is but you have actually used a
critical method to try to knock it down
you have thought critically but your
failure to find a flaw could simply be a
failure of imagination some famous
philosophers like to use a phrase
similar to we cannot imagine how it
could be otherwise like for example we
cannot imagine how there could be any
other basis for morality than conscious
creatures or we cannot imagine any way
in which the speed of light could be
exceeded or
pick your most cherished so-called
self-evident truth
one's very human and subjective failure
of imagination is neither an objective
proof or disproof this is what
philosophers at their best do as their
business what they should do anyway
what many okay okay some have done in
the past
philosophy as i have said many times and
as is echoed in the work of david
deutsch indeed has today a deservedly
bad reputation so much of what marches
under the banner of philosophy is not
really anything of the sort
philosophy as a subject ranges from the
focused study of all that is rational in
the most careful and deliberate way
through to the more esoteric and through
yes to utter nonsense philosophy most
broadly considered is a mess
in this subject it is as if we were to
call astrology creationism and ghost
hunting science along with biology and
physics as if we were to call the sound
of a riot in the streets music such
redefinitions would be a serious problem
for the term music or indeed science but
it would do nothing whatsoever to
actually bear upon the question of what
is true or not in say physics
that would still be adjudicated by the
critical methods of experiment and
theory i have already outlined so
although you may hear that karl popper
was a philosopher and that epistemology
and critical rationalism are kinds of
philosophy this does not mean they are
mere opinions
they are rigorous formulations and sets
of intertwined ideas themselves
criticized and refined over many years
and which explain above all else how
knowledge grows and what techniques are
best in sifting good ideas from bad that
is the topic of critical thinking
critical thinking is about showing what
is wrong with ideas so that better ones
can be produced and we can get ever
closer to the truth by discovering more
of it
we understand much about this critical
process about critical thinking that so
many people who use the term critical
thinking appear never to have even heard
of karl popper let alone critical
rationalism as a world view has
absolutely zero bearing on what critical
thinking truly is
it is what it is as physics is what it
is even if some people who know next to
nothing about it claim to
but so far we've only concentrated on
half of the story let me now get to
creativity creative thinking the little
we know
here is where we must again delve into
philosophy we must use our critical
faculties to sift what is known from
what is merely hypothesized or hoped for
uncoupled from reality here is a rule of
thumb again due to david deutsch if we
can understand something we can program
it
okay
allow me a moment to unpack that here
are some things we understand to greater
or lesser degrees we understand simple
arithmetic we know how to add numbers
subtract them we can divide and do
things like factorize
indeed we know we understand all this
because we can program and then build
electronic calculators that do all of
these things for us
we have understood much of this for
millennia we understand newton's laws of
motion and his theory of gravity we can
program a computer with virtual solar
systems and with those calculate where
our planet will be at any time from now
to a thousand years hence
the formula that allow us to do this
have been known for centuries we have
some understanding of chemical reactions
as well and geological processes we can
program computers with these things too
and make some predictions but here is
something we understand far less well
how economic markets work this is not to
say we understand nothing at all
but we know far less than most people
seem to think we cannot in the
scientific sense predict the behavior of
markets well at all and indeed we have
good explanations as to why such
prediction is beyond us
the complexity for a start is too great
for us to capture with any simple
mathematical theory that could be
represented in a computer system
or a better way of framing this still is
free markets especially contain
inherently unpredictable components
because they rely on the choices that
people make and people make choices
based upon the knowledge they create and
that knowledge is a genuine act of
creation which means anyone purporting
to predict markets is pretending they
are prophesying they are saying they
know what people are going to do and
when i say markets i mean free markets
of course we can kind of predict what
will happen in the long run to any
controlled market it fails and a vast
majority of people end up in poverty and
starving we know this because a
controlled market cannot correct the
errors that the authorities controlling
them are making at a rate faster than
they're making them
the authorities are much slower always
slower than what the supply and demand
changes that occur in the market are
but i digress
in free markets there are not only too
many finely tuned variables most of
which we don't even know which come to
bear on prices and so on which make
prediction intractable
but that many of the variables depend
upon again the inherent unpredictability
of people who are knowledge creators the
multitudinous feedback mechanisms that
work here are explained in a very
approximate way by economic theories
that themselves if they are at all any
good explain why predicting markets not
only now but forever is completely
infeasible and indeed always and forever
intractable just for emphasis once again
this is because a truly predictive model
of a market would have to account for
the free choices people make and that
would mean predicting what a person does
despite what some economists
sociologists psychologists philosophers
or neuroscientists might attempt to
imply
this is something we cannot do
nor should we desire to
does this mean market speculation and
buying shares and investment broadly and
so on as a lost cause
no
one can have a bad slightly less bad or
a good or even no explanation whatsoever
of what makes a particular company
successful and one can investigate the
people in those companies and although
there can never be any guarantees a
scientific type prediction cannot be
made good explanations about products
services management and innovation in
companies can absolutely inform
speculation it is called speculation for
a reason and it takes deep knowledge in
order to be able to make the right
investment at the right time and
although predicting the behaviour of a
genuine free market is impossible day to
day week to week or year to year the
long term trend of a free market should
be for increasing wealth but this is
only ever over the long term and even a
theory that takes into account freedom
optimism and technological improvement
can never guard against the unknown
entirely disaster can always look just
around the corner and this is key what
is not in a free market unlike in a
controlled or planned market is coercion
coercion always and everywhere leads to
ruin to a greater or lesser degree
because coercion is not inherent in a
free market a prediction we can make is
in the long run a free market economy
will always outperform for a greater
number of people a planned economy but
that theory is a theory about theories
it is a meta-economic theory and the
reason it is true is because in a free
economy people are more free to be more
creative everything is more free so
how can we improve this creative
thinking which is so important for
creating wealth which improves
everyone's life which is supposed to be
the topic well sadly this is something
we know only a very little about indeed
one is tempted to say we know next to
nothing about it human creativity is a
truly unique feature of the world as we
know it in the year that i am making
this 2021 but human creativity is not
the only type of creativity there's at
least one other i'm aware of evolution
by natural selection
evolution by natural selection creates
new species
by a similar process of guess and check
or rather in that case specifically
mutation or variation and selection
that is a form of creativity but it is
not conscious it is not thought through
human creativity is intelligently
designed biological creativity the
opposite it is utterly blind that kind
the biological is a physical process
where genes are rejected by the
environment in which they find
themselves if a gene works it is kept by
an organism until it doesn't and the
organism dies and if that happens enough
the gene along with its host species
goes extinct
genes are their unit of selection and
nature is what criticizes genes might
survive the criticism or not a criticism
of a gene might amount to the
environment changing in such a way as to
restrict water that is to say a drought
happens in this case the gene may not
survive variants of the gene that code
for say the capacity to survive in less
water will survive because the organism
survives in this way variation within a
species leads to speciation a new
species more drought resistant than the
one before the drought evolves and
survives
but i do not wish to push the analogy
too far here
human creativity and the growth of
knowledge approximately resembles this
process a new idea is kind of like a
gene it is typically a variation on an
old idea as a mutation is a variation of
an older version of a gene most gene
variations mutations are bad
most new ideas are bad but now and again
a variant is actually better it survives
the criticisms in biology this process
is all automated it is simply an
outworking of the interactions between
unthinking genes and an unthinking
environment
but in people things are quite different
the basic idea is the same new things
are criticized but the means by which
those new things come about at all is
very different
new genes are mutations and we
understand how mutations occur it is bad
copying and there's all sorts of reasons
for this it could be something as
prosaic as a cosmic ray a particle of
light which hits the dna and changes it
but how does human creativity work
here is what we seem to know human type
explanation creativity is about making a
variation to an existing idea
one cannot wholesale invent x nilio as
we say it does not come utterly from
nothing at a minimum the idea has to at
least be expressible in some form
natural language paint a set of numbers
so there has to be some pre-existing
thing some human creation there for one
to adapt but then what
we don't know and that's the truth we
don't know if we knew how it was we
created new ideas then just as with
programming an artificial solar system
in a computer we could program a
computer to do it to come up with new
ideas
and this by the way is why we do not
have computers that can think this is
why we do not have artificial
intelligence or artificial general
intelligence or agi whatever you want to
call it the problem is not the hardware
the physical stuff that the computer is
made from silicon valley remains ablaze
with the idea that somehow via moore's
law the idea that computer power speed
and memory is doubling every 18 months
or so is going to precipitate agi as
though faster computers that can store
more staff or the internet itself is
about to come alive and start learning
as though it is just a matter of speed
and memory
this is completely false it is not just
wide of the mark it's not even shooting
for the right target so the problem has
nothing to do with speed or memory that
is it has nothing whatever to do with
hardware it has everything to do with
software with the program we have no
program of thinking which is to say we
have no way of programming
general human creativity we don't know
how it works unlike with arithmetic or
the laws of physics or even to some
extent the theory of natural selection
we don't know how it works unlike
arithmetic or the laws of physics or how
chemical reactions proceed most of the
time
we can broadly speaking program those
things into a computer and simulate them
but we cannot simulate thinking which
would be thinking because we don't
understand it and this also refutes the
notion by the way
that even if you think it is about
software for example that lots of
software ais which is to say specialized
or narrow ai or dumb ai
linked together in some way will all
somehow add up to a general intelligence
as if general intelligence is just lots
of special intelligences
but it's not it's a single unique
program for generating explanations
that's what artificial general
intelligence is it's not lots of ai's
it's a single agi very different things
opposites almost
single ai's are things that can do one
thing or linking a hundred together a
thing that can do 100 things
agi has no upper bound on the different
things that it can learn so long as it
continues to exist
so here's the thing we have to
understand and find detail how
generating explanations being creative
which is to say how to replicate
thinking works in us
before we can program computers to do it
it is not the case the one day we will
find a thinking computer and then wonder
how is it doing that
no
first we will have an explanation of how
thinking works in us in people
and then we will know how to program a
computer to think
so here is the corollary to all that
because we do not understand how new
ideas are actually generated which is to
say we don't understand how people think
and we know this because we cannot
program a computer to think we cannot
hope to improve the creativity of people
because we do not have a theory of how
creativity works even approximately so
i've sketched here the basics of what we
do know about creativity namely next to
nothing we know creativity at a minimum
involves variations on ideas already
there but beyond that we know very
little else and all humans are indeed
creative all of them even if they appear
not to be using their creativity
this after all is what humans at a very
fundamental level are creative beings
if fish swim and spiders bite and birds
fly and the proverbial scorpion stings
we create that is what we are and if i
were to grant in a steel manning sort of
a way that some other animals like
higher apes demonstrate creativity and i
do not grant this but if i did
it is orders and orders of magnitude
lesser and of a different kind but see
my other writings on the differences
between humans and other animals for
that
so let's briefly consider our creative
luminaries like alan turing who invented
the theory of the computer eventually
leading to the building of one albert
einstein who explained the general
theory of relativity allowing for the
gps system salvador dali whose melting
clocks gave us a surrealist and
disturbing insight into our experience
of time ahmadis mozart almost the
einstein of music whose technical
versatility was able to conjure more
sound in strange new ways forming deeply
emotional music unlike so much that had
come before if we could explain how any
of this was actually done we could
reproduce a computer to do it or teach a
child to do it but we cannot a child
teaches us what they can do just as
turing einstein dali and mozart taught
us we do not teach them and could you
imagine daring to suggest to any of
these masters
that we possess techniques to encourage
creative thinking they were creative in
those areas because they were fascinated
by problems in those areas problems they
personally found interesting for very
personal reasons
any one of us could do what they did if
only we were just interested in those
problems but most of us aren't so what
would they have needed to improve their
creativity still further here is perhaps
all we know
freedom and time that's it freedom to
explore any idea technique or method
they liked freedom to explore those
ideas when and where they pleased
freedom to do what they were most
interested in and passionate about and
time time to do this whenever they
needed it now further
imagine you said to einstein to be
well-rounded einstein you need to spend
this time now playing some of mozart's
music on the piano and this time now
learning a little poetry and this time
now learning to speak cantonese that'll
be useful for you albert all this time
taken for albert einstein to do this
maybe we wouldn't have gps right now
imagine forcing mozart to learn more
algebra or chemistry would this help
their creativity or not the point here
is not that those subjects would be
utterly useless for those people it is
that we would be choosing for them
einstein apparently did actually value
his violin almost above physics but he
chose where to play it and when
iterative cycles of creative thinking
creative being
undirected adaptations of existing
knowledge
coupled with critical thinking critical
thinking being criticisms of those
undirected adaptations in order to trim
the false from the closer to true
all of this critical and creative
thinking together is the way that
learning occurs
this is what we know it is important to
emphasize that this is a process that
goes on inside your mind and it's not a
mere physical activity of neurons
although it is also that it is not
primarily that
this is why learning is not part of the
purview of neuroscience any more than
art is within the purview of physics and
let me explain a little bit on that
because i know there is now a
neuroscience of learning which is
completely misguided
it's kind of like this i know some
physics i know some physics about light
and color i can explain something of the
interaction between matter and energy
and how different substances when
they're excited by energy be it light
shining on it or thermal energy heating
it it might appear to be green or red or
blue or some combination thereof i know
about these processes that's physics but
just because i can explain some of that
does not mean i know anything at all
about the light and shade as used in art
the two ways color are used in the two
subjects have something to do with each
other of course they do but expertise in
one does not necessarily constitute
expertise in the other
my understanding of the physics of light
does not in any way enable me to be able
to explain how light should be used in a
painting in order to either make it look
more realistic or to convey a certain
mood or feeling that is a whole
different type of knowledge at a
different level of emergence and
complexity so it is here again talking
about fashions that go on in education
presently we're hearing much about how
so-called brain science
brain science might inform learning as
if they haven't even learned the
distinction between the mind and the
brain it's all overblown we never learn
much from mri scans of the brain or what
neuroscience has learned about some new
structure identified in the hippocampus
when i say we never learn much i mean we
never learn much about learning and we
never will for the same reason an artist
expert in painting is not going to learn
much ever about how color is generated
by the interaction between photons and
electrons around atoms it's the wrong
level of emergence it's the wrong kind
of complexity to be more specific the
artist is interested in how paint can
abstractly represent other physical
objects the physicist is concerned
solely with the physical objects in
themselves
so it is here
the epistemologist or psychologist
interested in learning should be
concerned with how a person is able to
take pieces of knowledge and recreate it
in their own mind through the process of
creative and critical thinking at no
point do we need to refer to neurons and
neurotransmitters the prefrontal cortex
and the synapses that is the physical
substrates in which the knowledge is
embedded
not in order to understand learning it's
not that it's entirely irrelevant for
now wet brains are the sole objects in
the universe we know of that can
actually create explanatory knowledge
but to think it is of fundamental
importance that the hardware is a
certain way
is the wrong direction entirely it
really is like thinking that if you're
having trouble using your word
processing program that a better
understanding of the silicon chips
inside of the computer might just be
what's required the study of silicon
chips is of course crucial to
understanding computers as a whole but
not all problems with computers are
reducible to silicon chips and so it is
very much with minds not all our
ignorance for example about how learning
works best when it comes to the mind is
reducible to what aspects of the brain
like neurons neurotransmitters synapses
and the brain regions are doing indeed
only a tiny minority of ways in which
one might improve one's own mind will be
usefully informed in this way by
neuroscience the distinction here really
is one of software versus hardware
confusing the two leads to much
confusion
okay so here are my final thoughts my
critically creative conclusions or
perhaps creatively critical conclusions
and presumption aside why would i go
with one word order over another
critically creative creatively critical
i don't know
my reasons are actually opaque to me one
sounded much the same as the other
putting creatively first seemed even
more presumptuous than putting critical
first
i'm suggesting that anything i write
here is actually creative
false modesty does no one favors this
has been a truly creative act the entire
piece and yet it is not a wholesale
creation ex nilio it never is
this here is an adaptation of many ideas
most of them i'm getting from david
deutsch who himself of course gained
them in part from karl popper i struggle
in fact to find anything i write here
completely unique and that is not false
modesty and i'm sure if you asked karl
popper he would say oh i was just
riffing off someone else but perhaps my
application of these ideas to the rather
narrow topic of how teachers tend to
teach and how teachers themselves are
taught might be a little bit different
so i do not even now know which is to
say i do not understand i'm not aware of
how i came to create what i just did i
just do it given the time and motivation
ideas flow when i'm interested isn't
this what teachers should desire from
the students they are ostensibly
supposed to teach from people we want to
learn a particular lesson what did i
personally need in order to do this here
today to actually be somewhat creative
freedom like i said before in time and
were i forced to try and be critical or
creative about let's say russian
literature i would not as i explained in
my piece on learning that i mentioned
earlier so there is a deep problem with
the attempt to actually teach
critical and creative thinking skills
using techniques simply called critical
and creative thinking now at no point
should it be thought that i'm trying to
disparage attempts to improve
educational systems everyone who wants
to add another subject to the curriculum
is motivated i guess by the right thing
of trying to improve things and
i agree that we need something like a
revolution but i don't agree with what
that revolution would look like and what
i see actually going on is nothing of
the sort i see the same terrible errors
and patterns occurring year after year
after year
when i say revolution what i mean is out
with compulsory schools where they exist
and out with the tradition of just
sending your children off to school as
if it was a child care center but i'm
also a realist this is not going to
happen within any time frame i can
reasonably foresee and for the moment it
is safer to just hope for incremental
progress and do what we can in speaking
about this and encouraging others to
continue to work on alternative systems
for the nurturing of children in better
ways
but in this narrow area of critical and
creative thinking as it is currently
presented in schools and universities
let's be critical and speak clearly and
plainly and tell the truth the truth is
that lip service is paid to this notion
of critical and creative thinking in
education systems
it's just being named and then teaching
strategies deployed which are called
critical thinking skills or creative
thinking
a very typical example of how critical
thinking might be taught around you can
be found on your local university
website just google critical thinking
and your local university see what pops
up typically you get a checklist of
techniques approaches to text
processes to go through in order to
analyze something for example usually a
piece of writing and there are certainly
some worthwhile questions they often
consider in these things questions about
the relevance of evidence say i'll
provide a link in the description to
this podcast from what my local
university the university of sydney has
to say about this i'm not picking on
them
i've looked at many university websites
they'll say roughly the same thing i
think because they all come from a
certain educational culture there's
probably some original source out there
where they're drawing all this stuff
from the important thing to notice is
that the overall motivation of such
schemes belies the fact they miss the
central point that critical thinking is
or should be about criticism about
criticizing stuff and one might even
begin with criticizing these schemes
themselves by the way children actually
do this they object to the lesson they
object to the class they object to the
methods and of course teachers label
such objections behavioral issues
genuine critical thinking in the most
pure sense of the word is regarded as an
unwillingness to learn of course what
that really is is an unwillingness to
learn what we have to teach as well as
the way we are teaching it a student who
objects to the teaching going on is
being a critical thinker schemes that
attempt to prompt students with helpful
guides to assist with analysis
tend to as i say lock in
ways of thinking rather than allowing
for truly novel approaches that a
student might take now teachers
listening might object to me hold on
these schemes are just recommendations
they're supposed to help you and i agree
but let's consider help with what
exactly
what are these schemes for critical
thinking trying to achieve well
according to my sydney university
example you may wish to refer to their
critical thinking skill sheet explicitly
says it is at least in part about how to
quote
achieve better marks unquote
and perhaps that is of course the whole
point
that is exactly what it is designed to
do
formulaic techniques can indeed do that
because there are recipes to the way
exams are written there must be simple
rules to follow in order to achieve well
in them but passing exams getting good
marks these are not critical and
creative thinking following certain
rules to get good results on a test is
the absolute antithesis to creativity
which is the flip side of the coin
teaching so-called critical thinking in
that way using some recipe of techniques
stamps on creativity because the very
purpose stated explicitly as in this
case or at least implied by the lessons
is that we are here to pass tests to
meet standards and objectives to fit a
mold to not create something truly new
but to best we can meet the outcomes
a child rarely gets to create their own
outcomes except outside of school
unconstrained by march reports
expectations and rules now it should be
said within school some illusion is
given sometimes
about students personally devising
outcomes but i've argued elsewhere this
is merely playing in shallow waters when
there's a deep ocean to explore we must
not lie to ourselves the purpose of
lessons truly
is to pass exams and get good results
for so long as the education system
remains the way it is
roughly the same as it has been for
centuries we have tinkered at the edges
and more tinkering is required and will
happen but it is no revolution and
calling things critical and creative
thinking that truly are not
does not help it disguises the problem
it is problem denial not problem solving
people in classrooms do create they are
sometimes actively engaged anytime they
learn something new it is truly because
they have created that knowledge in
their minds anew a student who did not
know before that the square of the
hypotenuse is equal to the sum of the
squares on the other two sides has
created that in their mind and if they
know how if they can prove it they've
really learned something what they've
done in learning that is attempted to
criticize it and without a good
criticism they tend to end up taking it
on board as part of their corpus of
personal knowledge and they're regarded
as something they can then say of it i
know this thing so to a large extent
creativity and critical thinking is
certainly going on in classrooms you
actually can't stop it but you can stunt
it you can stunt it in all manner of
ways school teachers university
lecturers are in a peculiar situation of
being asked to maximize the very thing
that the system they are working within
is bent on minimizing the theory is
help maximize critical and creative
thinking the practice is minimize both
because that is how tests are passed
creativity the word is everywhere it's a
wonderful word it's a wonderful concept
like innovation it is the key to
civilization but we don't really
understand it it would be great if we
could learn that is to say teach
ourselves to be elon musk or albert
einstein or wolfgang amadeus mozart if
we wanted but we don't understand how
creativity works no one does or we would
all know creativity is a word that fills
compulsory coercive schooling and
although i have argued the system is
flawed i do think at least talking about
the word is good if we do so honestly
this indeed is incremental process this
is better than actually telling students
explicitly not to be creative teachers
rarely do that anymore as my guess i may
be wrong but i know the system is set up
to implicitly warn them against genuine
creativity after all they are there
ultimately to perform well in assessment
tasks critical and creative thinking is
absolutely crucial to learning it is
essential to knowledge creation both at
the level of the individual and as a
society it is how progress actually
happens current ideas our best ideas are
criticized strongly constantly as
harshly as we can not because we dislike
them necessarily but because we love
them and the best we can do for them is
to improve them have them lead to the
birth of new ideas new creations and we
have to admit when we are not quite sure
about how aspects of this process works
we have to admit when we are ignorant
because only then can we allow a truly
important creative insight to come about
a genuine explanatory theory of
creativity and when we have that we can
teach that but until then let's not
pretend our scams can do more than they
really can
credit
this article is based in large part on
the ideas found in the books the fabric
of reality and the beginning of infinity
by david deutsch
the beginning of infinity in particular
has entire chapters devoted to
creativity its evolution and
significance the fabric of reality has a
number of important chapters about the
role of criticism in science
both books are not only explorations of
these concepts and the growth of
knowledge but also examples of
creativity and critical thinking and
practice
not only educators but all people
interested in these issues should take
the time to read those ideas they can be
bought anywhere you can buy books of
course
and there's audio versions of both
if you've enjoyed this podcast at all or
found any value in it you might like to
wish to find me on patreon and support
me my name is brett hall and my podcast
is toccast thanks a lot talk to you next
time bye